---
layout: project
title: MAE 4300 Ethics Writeup
description: Ethics Writeup
technologies: [n/a]
image: /assets/images/spaceship-design.jpg
---

This essay focuses on the ethical issues surrounding the Boeing 737 MAX crashes and the MCAS system that was implemented. The crashes of this aircraft exposed significant issues not only in technical design, but in ethical decision-making, transparency, training, and regulatory oversight, which is what this essay will focus on. 

The Boeing 737 MAX was developed amongst a lot of competitive pressures. To improve fuel efficiency, Boeing installed larger engines that were mounted higher and farther forward on the wings, which altered the aircraft’s aerodynamics. Because of all the competitive pressures faced, Boeing decided to alter the existing aircraft to be able to jump over some of the important safety checkpoints, which ultimately led to the crash of the aircraft. MCAS was introduced to automatically help the pilots correct the angle of attack. However, the system relied on data from a single angle-of-attack sensor and because the aircraft was treated as a modified design rather than a new one, some certification requirements were reduced or bypassed and pilots were not informed of this system even existing.

One ethical failure in this redesign was the lack of pilot training. Many pilots were neither informed of the system’s existence or trained to respond to its failure modes. More training could have prevented the crashes by enabling pilots to quickly recognize when the system was not acting as expected. The lack of training violates ASME Canon 1, which requires engineers to place the safety, health, and welfare of the public. ASME Canon 2, which emphasizes performing engineering services only within areas of competence, is also relevant, as pilots were expected to manage a system they were never even informed of. Safety-critical knowledge should be shared, even when doing so creates financial or competitive disadvantages. Therefore, even though more training would come at a higher cost, the FAA should have enforced this training because it would have helped prevent these crashes and saved many lives.

Some engineers at Boeing were aware of some of these issues, however, these concerns were not always brought up to management or were not addressed properly when brought up. This reflects ethical issues connected to ASME Canon 1, which prioritizes public safety, and Canon 7, which requires engineers to act with honesty and integrity in professional practice. Engineers have an ethical obligation to raise safety concerns, and it was not done so in this case. This is due to organizational pressure, fear of job loss, and hierarchical culture which discouraged open communication. Boeing leadership should have fostered an environment in which engineers could report safety issues without fear of retaliation, ensuring that all concerns were documented and shared with the FAA. People in leadership positions should also receive safety training so that they have a full understanding of the consequences of their actions. 

Boeing also prioritized competition and cost over safety. Safety standards were overlooked, and ethical decision-making was influenced by a pressure to get an airplane designed as quickly as possible. These actions once again conflict with ASME Canon 1 and Canon 6, which emphasizes maintaining the honor and reputation of the engineering profession. A solution to this would be the FAA enforcing timelines and creating specific safety checkpoints in the design timeline of an aircraft. Some of this also comes from a culture of competition that is present in our world. 

Another issue in this case is the lack of transparency throughout the process. The system’s functionality and risks were not fully documented or communicated to pilots, airlines, or the public. This lack of transparency made it difficult to learn from mistakes and enforces the importance of documentation.  These actions violate ASME Canon 7, which requires honesty and integrity, and Canon 10, which emphasizes ethical conduct that builds public trust. Documentation and standardized communication are essential, and the fact that no one knew exactly what was happening is an example of the failure from Boeing. The FAA should enforce transparency requirements to ensure that all design decisions and system behaviors are fully disclosed and consistently communicated to all stakeholders.

Different stakeholders also interpret value-laden terms differently, which complicates ethical decision-making. For example Boeing often defined safety as meeting minimum certification standards, while victims’ families viewed safety as there being no risk in flying on an aircraft. Similarly, transparency meant technically accurate disclosure to Boeing, while it meant full openness to families about everything related to safety. The fact that the meaning of these values differs for stakeholders emphasizes why this accident is a wicked problem.

Overall, there is not one solution that will prevent this from happening in the future. Instead, all stakeholders must consider how their actions relate to the safety of those around them. Pilot training should be mandatory for any new aircraft, even when it increases cost. Engineers should be encouraged to report safety concerns, and these concerns should be documented. Additionally, the FAA should enforce full transparency for safety-critical systems as well as documentation if mistakes happen. 


